# Coding Interview Tips

As an interviewer and interviewee I have noticed candidates having preconceived notions about what is expected of them in coding interviews. This article provides some tips on how to best manage a coding interview.

Many, if not most candidates get under time pressure when the coding exercises are given, throughout the interview, and espceially at the end of the interview with few minutes left. There is also a perception that the interviewee should start writing code immediately after reading the question, or else they will be considered to be slow. Taking a break to think of the solution may lead to an awkward silence which might give the interviewer uncertainly about what the interviewee is doing. If there is a question given with perhaps 2-3 minutes to go to the end of the interview slot, there is a pressure to solve it within that limited time. Another perception many have is that asking the interviewer for help on a small thing shows lack of knowledge. These are largely misconcetions, and usually these lead to the interiewee start writing code with the first idea that strikes them, and never really taking time to think.

**Here are some suggestions on how to best handle the above situations:**
1) At the start of every question, ask "How much time do I have for this?". Usually the answer is 5 or 10 minutes, which is ample time to solve the particular problem. This is especially important if the interview time is running out and a question is put. When a interviewer does that, it shows they are more than willing to extent the interview by a few minutes. An interview doesn't have to finish on the scheduled time.
2) Do not start writing code as soon as reading the question. Take a little time to think through the solution. The interviewer is not looking for a mental genius who can solve all problems in 10 milliseconds.
3) If you tell the interviewer that you need a minute to think, that's always allowed, so mention that first. A brief silence of 30 seconds to 1 minute after that is fine, but even better is to start vocalizing the thinking, e.g. 'So... I have to first split this string into a list, then..." or "That means I need to join this table with that to get...". Not only this bridges the silence period, it gives the interviewer an insight into the thinking process of the interviewee, which is a positive.
4) If you have got the solution largely, but are stuck on a small point or two, ask the interviewer for help. They will gladly do so, as they want to see if you can solve the problem, and how you solve the problem, rather that whether you can get, for example, the exact syntax or exact order of parameters in a function. This helps them proceed to the next question quicker. The bigger unseen benefit is to show that in an actual work situation you will ask for help quickly rather than waste hours trying to solve a small problem, and that you are used to teamwork.
5) For SQL questions, occasionally there will be more tables given than are required. The interviewer wants to see if you can quickly eliminate the unnecessary tables and start focusing on the required ones, rather than trying to see how to use all the tables. A telltale sign is if there are 4 or more tables given. *Generally*, SQL interview questions require no more than 3 tables to solve.
